---
title: SEEK User Guide - Browsing Samples
layout: page
---

# Browsing Samples
You can browse Samples registered in SEEK by Templates or by Sample Type. 
* From any page, click on Browse from the top navigation bar
* Select Samples from the dropdown menu

## Browse Samples by Templates
Browsing Samples by Templates allows you to query the samples of interest based on Templates, Template attributes and attribute’s values of the samples of interest.

Moreover, Advanced filtering allows you to further refine your query based on Templates, Template attributes and attribute’s values of (indirect) parents and/or children (inputs and/or outputs) samples of your samples of interest.

**Query Samples**
* Select Search by Templates
* Select the Project(s) to which the samples of interest must belong
* Select the Template (for Sample Types) used to create the samples of interest. You can also select
  * a specific Attribute of the selected Template
    * a specific value for the selected Attribute

*Advanced filtering - Input Sample(s)*
* Select the Template (for Sample Types) used to create the input(s) or parent samples of your samples of interest. You can also select
  * a specific Attribute of the selected input(s) or parent samples Template
    * a specific value for the selected Attribute

*Advanced filtering - Output Sample(s)*
* Select the Template (for Sample Types) used to create the output(s) or children samples of your samples of interest. You can also select
  * a specific Attribute of the selected output(s) or children samples Template
    * a specific value for the selected Attribute

* Click on Query to view your samples of interest (query’s result)
* Click on Export table to export the result of the query as spreadsheet


## Browse Samples by Sample Type
Browsing Samples by Sample Type allows you to browse the samples generated by one Sample Type. Samples can be browsed based on one Sample Type at the time.
* Select the Project(s) to which the Sample Type of interest must belong. You can select Projects among
  * Your Projects: these are the Projects you are a member of that have sample types defined
  * Other Projects: these are the Projects you are not a member of that have sample types defined
* Scroll down to see the list of all selected Sample Types. Click on the Sample Type of your interest
* Click on View samples button (visible only if at least one Sample has been created with the selected Sample Type by any user) on the top right corner of the page
* Use the search boxes in each column to browse samples
* Click on Export table to export the search result as spreadsheet


